Data Browser
============

--------------

Overview

`|image0| <files/loci/images/software/data-browser.png>`_

The Data Browser is an ImageJ plugin that facilitates quick browsing of
multichannel, multi-focal plane time course datasets. It is integrated
with the Bio-Formats importer plugin—as well as ImageJ's built-in
hyperstack and virtual stack support—to provide multidimensional
visualization capabilities across space, time and channels.

Features
~~~~~~~~

The primary goal of the Data Browser is to allow quick and easy
visualization of large, multidimensional data within ImageJ. It supports
data spanning multiple focal planes (Z), time points (T), and channels
(C), and reads a subset of image planes from the data source into memory
at one time, so that datasets larger than the available RAM can be
browsed effectively. The Data Browser is similar to Joachim Walter's
`Image5D <http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/plugins/image5d.html>`_ plugin, but
was developed independently.

The Z, T and C positions are browsed by moving sliders labeled
"Z-depth", "time", and "channel" respectively. The blue bars beneath
each of the sliders show which image planes have been cached in memory,
while the red bars indicate planes currently in the process of being
cached. The "Animate" button begins cycling through the time axis at the
current Z and C positions. The "Options" button displays a host of
configuration parameters, such as dimensional axis ordering and planar
caching preferences. The "Metadata" button displays the OME-XML metadata
associated with the dataset.

The user can perform normal operations on the image (e.g.,
Process>Smooth), but they will only affect the currently visible image
plane.

Download

Language: 

Java

Latest Version: 

4.1.0 (2009 October 21)

Download: 

`loci\_tools.jar <http://www.loci.wisc.edu/files/software/loci_tools.jar>`_

Installation and Usage: 

#. Place in **ImageJ plugins folder**
#. Next time you run ImageJ, a new LOCI submenu with several plugins
   will appear in the **Plugins menu**
#. Choose **Data Browser** from the LOCI menu and select a file when
   prompted

More Information

Trac Path: 

`components/loci-plugins <http://dev.loci.wisc.edu/trac/software/browser/trunk/components/loci-plugins/>`_

SVN Path: 

`components/loci-plugins <http://dev.loci.wisc.edu/svn/software/trunk/components/loci-plugins/>`_

.. |image0| image:: files/loci/imagecache/thumbnail/images/software/data-browser.png
